So we've looked at two sports,
baseball and cricket, and now we're going to run
exactly the same exercise. Look at the relationship
between win percentage and Pythagorean expectation for
a third sport that is basketball. We're going to use NBA data for
the 2018 season. So, and we're going to use exactly
the same process as we used in the previous two cases. So let's get going. So, first, we load up the packages,
next we load up the data. This is slightly different
data frame here and we have all of the games for
each team in each season. And what we have here is
the various statistics relating to the performance of the teams. But we also have in this data frame,
something to know. Each team appears twice for each game, first as the home team and
then as the away team. So in that sense, we have twice
as many rows as we have games. So whereas before we needed to separate
out and create two data frames for home team and away team, actually, this has
already been done for us in this data set. That's a difference that it's
worth remembering as we move on. You can either have a data frame, which identifies an individual
game where you have two teams. And then, if you want to measure
the performance of each team, do you need to separate them out? Or you have a data frame where
each game appears in two rows, one for the home team and
one for the visiting team. So, in this data frame,
we have two rows for each game. So also, this data frame includes
more data than we need, and we just want to focus on
regular season NBA games. So we take that subset here, we can see the list of variables
that we have in our data here. Again, we've got many more
variables than we need. We're also going to drop
rows with missing variables. We don't want to include
those in analysis, and so we can drop those here using dropna. And then we identify each game where
the team wins with the value one, which means that, of course,
it's either win or lose situation. So that is way, if you didn't win,
you have a zero, which represents a loss. So that enables us to count up the
statistics and the values for each team. So now here, instead of creating dudes
two data frames and merging them. We actually can create just one data
frame using a group by for team name, with the results for each team,
the points scored and the points against again, it's a sum. But we don't need to do the teams as home, team and away team because that's
already been sorted out for us. So we just have a list of teams again. This list is going to
be 30 rows long term. So, now we look at the data, so
we've got actually 29 teams, so we have one missing team in our data here. But that doesn't matter
too much in this context. And we have the result, the number of
wins for the team across the seas, the number of points scored and
the number of points against. And out of that,
we can create the win percentage again. Every team plays 82 games, so
the win percentage is just the value for the result divided by 82. And we have the Pythagorean expectation,
which is as before, points scored squared divided by
the sum of points scored squared and point conceded squared. So we have our data in the format
that we want to analyze it. And so
we do the same things we did before. Now, with our statistical analysis, we first run a rail plot to see
what the relationship looks like. And you can see that list looks very
similar now to the baseball example. Not at all like the cricket example. And if we run our regression,
you'll see that the regression results are also rather similar to what
we found in the baseball case. We can see here the coefficient
on the Pythagorean expectation. We can see a very large t statistic and
a P value of 0.000 which essentially means this is highly
statistically significant. And we have up here in our square 2.943,
so, and even closer fit in that sense than
we saw with the baseball data. So in that sense,
we found that when we look at the NBA, we get a very similar result. And maybe that's because again we
have similar amounts of data to the amount that we had in baseball. Or maybe it's because again, the scoring rules work more like
baseball than they work like crickets. So again that gives us pause for thought is what might really be behind
the relationship that we observe here. So now we've done three sports. Let's look at one more. Let's look at english football and see
what the relationship looks like there.