Now we're going to look
at the relationship in English football or soccer as it's called in North America. Here we've got a slightly
different problem with the data we're
going to look at. In order to have more data, we can look at teams playing across different competitions
at the same time. Now that's not something
we could do with baseball. For example, if we wouldn't be unlikely to look at
the same relationship between major league baseball and minor league baseball
at the same time. Minor league baseball
is a lower level of baseball competition
and we wouldn't tend to mix up the data
from two competitions. But in soccer, we might be
actually tempted to do that. One reason is the phenomenon
of promotion and relegation. Teams move between levels from season to season
based on performance, the best teams in a
lower-division are promoted and replace
the worst teams in a higher division each year. In some sense, we can
think of the hierarchy of leagues in soccer as being related to each
other and in fact, in some sense, participating
in the same competition, particularly if we look
at competition over time. Here we're going to
look at English soccer, and we're going to look
at the four divisions which are connected through the system of promotion
and relegation. We're going to see
whether we have the same pythagorean expectation in relation to this data. Again, we follow the same
processes we followed before. We'll load the packages, and then we'll load the data. You can see here that we have actually a rather stripped
down form at the data, so we've got a relatively
small number of variables. Let's look at the
variables we've got. Again, for each team we've
got the games played, the home team, the away team, the goals scored, the goals
against, and the result. But remember also here
in the game of football, unlike most of the other
sports we've looked at, a draw or a tie is a
very common occurrence. The results here are H, that means home win, A, away team win, or D, that means a draw or a tie and we have a
lot of those games. The other thing to
notice is we have the first column here
is DIV means division, and then the EPL means
English Premier League, and then at the bottom
here you can see FL2, which means Football League 2, there are in fact four
divisions in our data, and we've combined all
of those in one dataset, so we have 2,000 rows. Again, a nice large
dataset of the similar to what we had with
baseball and basketball. Now what we're going to
do is we're going to code the value of the result. Now we're going to have
three results in our data. We're going to have a home win which will give a value of one, or we could have an
away win which would have a value of zero
for the home team. Obviously a one for the away
team if they're the winners, and then the third
possibilities we can have a drawer or tie and we're
going to get that a value 0. We're going to call a
draw equal to half a win. Using that convention,
we can then construct win percentages as well
in the world of soccer. Let's run that and
create these variables. We're going to have the count
variable again in order to see the number
of games played. Now, we're back in the world that we were in in the
first two sets of analysis when we looked at baseball and cricket where we've got each game is a single row, so we have to sort out
the performance of each team as a home team
and as an away team. You can see here the value for each team's performance
across the season. We're looking at the
number of home wins, games played at home full-time, home goals scored full-time, away goals scored, and so
forth as the home team. We got 92 teams in
total in the dataset, that's the all of the teams in the four divisions of
the league competition. Now we do the same thing, the mirror image for the teams. As away teams again, we've got the team names
and the games played. The number of away wins, goal score, goals against. Bearing in mind, we've got
now draws as half wins in this dataset and we now do the merge where we put
these two things together. We now have our combined
values for wins, games played, goals for, goals against, both as
home team and away team. We add those up to give the total number of
wins, total goals, total games played,
total goals scored, and total goals conceded. We have that as we did
in baseball and cricket. Then finally, we create the
values for win percentage, wins divided by number of games scored plus the
Pythagorean expectation, goals scored squared
divided by the sum of goals goals scored squared
and goals conceded squared. Then we have our DataFrame, again the same format, but this time now we have
92 teams in our dataset. We can do a rail plot again here. What we can do is add something
extra in our row plot. Because each of these
teams come from a different division,
potentially, we could actually code that
in our data and create a plot which shows each division as a different color
in the DataFrame. If you actually run this here, then look at what we get. You can see here it's color-coded and allows
us to see where each team in each division
is located on this chart. But once again, we get the
very clear relationship that we saw in the baseball
and basketball data. We see this very strong
linear relationship between Pythagorean
expectation of win percentage. In our soccer data, even though the structure of the competition is
rather different, we see exactly the same
relationship emerging. When we run our
regression, again, we look at the coefficient
on Pythagorean expectation, we have a value for the
coefficient and we can see it's statistically
highly significant. We have a very large
T-statistic and a p-value of 0.000 again. When we look at the
R squared up here, we can see an R squared of
0.93 for which tells us that our Pythagorean expectation is capturing a very large fraction, almost all the variation in lead position that we can find. What we've shown this
time is that again, even if we look at a very different competition we look at the world of soccer, we still find the
same relationship we found in baseball
and basketball which is telling us really this
Pythagorean expectation seems to be a fairly
common feature of all sports and the only outlier appears
to be cricket data. What we're going to do next is something a little bit extra compared to what
we've done so far. So far, we've said that
Pythagorean expectation seems to be a pretty good proxy for winning if you want to know whether a team is winning, but you don't know
the number of wins, but somebody tells you the
Pythagorean expectation, you wouldn't be a far wrong in most cases from saying, well, the winning percentage is probably close to their
Pythagorean expectation. But that's a rather
backward-looking way of thinking about it. We are thinking about
looking at past performance. What about the future? Could we use Pythagorean
expectation to predict what the outcome is going to
be of games in the future. That's what we're
going to look at in the final session of this week, we're going to look at
seeing whether we can use this as a forecasting tool.