So far this week, we've looked at the way in which you
can explain one variable using another. We've seen that we can relate,
win percentage to Pythagorean expectation, and show that there is a close
fit between these two variables. But so
now we're going to go one step further and ask whether we could actually
forecast win percentage in the future using historical
Pythagorean expectation. And of course, that's one thing we're
interested in with Data Analytics. You can think of there being
two aspects to this one is, can we explain what's
happened in the past? And the second is, can we forecast
what's going to happen in the future? So let's see how we might
do this with baseball data. And what we're going to do is we're
going to divide a particular season into two hogs, and then we're going to
take the Pythagorean expectation from one half the first half of the
season, and then we're going to see how well that fits with the win percentage
in the second half of the season. And as a control for that, we can look at how well the win percentage
from the first half of the season fits with the win percentage of
the second half of the season. And if our Pythagorean expectation did
better than win percentage, then we might think that that's not a bad forecasting
tool that we might have at our disposal. So let's go about it and see what we find. So we're going to start off
in the same way before we're going to import our packages. Import our data. Take a quick look at the data and
see what we got. Again we're familiar with this, so
we've actually seen this before, and then we're going to go through
the same process we've done. We did this right at the beginning
of the week, but we've done this for all the other sports as well. We're going to create the summary data for
Win Percentage and Pythagorean expectation for each team
as home team and as visiting team. And then we're going to combine
those two data frames together. Now we're going to do something different
now from what we did in the previous notebooks. We're going to use the command concat,
pd.concat, which is instead going to stack
the two performances the teams on top of each other so rather than merging them,
so you've got the home performance data on the left and
the away performance on the right. We're going to put one
on top of the other. So you've got home on the top and
away team performance on the bottom so that we've got a list essentially of
all games played across the season. So when we do that,
you can see that we have a list that is now 4862 rows long. So effectively,
we could then now list this in date order. So because we've got the date of this in
the data frame, and then we could create a subset which was going to be performance
up to a certain point in the season. And that's where we're going to
create the two halves of our data. We're going to look at performance
in the first half, which I'm going to choose an arbitrary date for,
and then look at the second half. So we still need to define
what is a win in this data. So again, a win is obviously where you
scored more runs than the opposing team. So we run that first. So we've got now wins in our data. So I'm going to divide the data
according to the All Star Game. So that's usually taken us the mid
point of the season in baseball. And in 2018,
the All Star Game was on July 17th. So the code for that in the data and
using our date is 20180717. And then I'm going to use
a command we haven't seen yet .described to show you
what that data looks like. So .described if you look across the top,
it gives you the count. So how many observations we have? So there were 2886 games up to
the All Star Game in the season, and it gives you some other descriptive
statistics there that you might want. And then we can do the same thing for
the second half. So I'm going to create a subset
out of the data called half, too, and describe that So
we've now two halves of the data half one. The results for the teams in
the first half of the season and half two the results for the teams
in the second half of the season. So now I need to create
the performance variables for each team in each half of the season. So I'm going to do a group by again. And so the group by looks very
similar to the sort of group by we've been running before. But because the data is stacked,
we've already taken account of when the teams are home team and
when the teams are away team. And you can see here,
we've got the performance for the number of games played in the first
half of the season for each team. Again, we've got 30 rows of data,
number of games played, number of wins, runs for and runs against. And so we can now create our performance
statistics for the win percentage and the Pythagorean expectation for
the first half of the season again. So we've just created those numbers here
in the way that we've done it at every stage before and likewise we're going
to create the performance variables for the second half of the season. So we're going to call this half two, and that's going to be again .group by
where we some against these variables. The same variables. Games played, the count, wins,
runs scored and runs against for the second half of the season. And we can create from that for the second
half of the season the win percentage and Pythagorean expectation for each team. And since we've now got for all 30 teams
their first half of the season and the second half of the season performance, let's merge these two
data frames together. Which we're going to start
calling this half to predictor, because I'm going to use the data from
the first half to see how well it predicts performance in the second half. So here we have the 30 roads of data,
one for each team and their performance statistics for
the first half and for this second half of the season. So let's just run a rail plot then. So let's run a rail plot. Where we have our X is the Pythagorean
expectation from the first half of the season and are Y is the win percentage
in the second half of the season? So let's see how closely these two
things look together on the same shot? Well, there you've gotta scatter, right? So it's not quite as perfect
as we saw when we looked at the simultaneous Pythagorean
expectation of win percentages. But it's not like the cricket where
there is no relationship at all. There's clearly some kind of relationship
there in the data that we can see. And just to see whether how
reliable that might be, let's compare it with the win
percentage from the first half of the season using the win percentage
of the second of the season. So what does that look like when we do? And you can see here,
it's actually rather similar. So perhaps that's not surprising,
because win Percentage and Pythagorean expectation go closely
together is perhaps not surprising that we see predictor of win percentage
in the second half of the season as roughly similar to
the Pythagorean expectation. So now what we're going to do is
look at correlations to see which is more correlated with performance in
the second half of the season win percentage in the second
half of the season. Is it the win percentage from
the first half of the season, or the win percentage from
the second half of the season? I'm going to create these variables
here and create the correlation. So what I've done here is I've defined
a set of variables called Kiev abs, my key variables. And then I'm asking for
a correlation matrix for kiev abss. So that's what this looks like. So let's read this across the top. So here is the variable. We're particularly interested in win
percentage in the second half of the season. And here is the level of
correlation between win percentage in the second of the season and
our other variables. Well, what are other variables? So the first is win percentage
of the second half season? Well, of course,
it's perfectly correlated with itself, So that's just has a value of one. That's going to be true across
the diagonals in this Matrix, so you can just ignore those. But here's the thing we're interested in. The correlation between win percentage
in the second half of the season and win percentage in the first
half of the season. And the correlation between win
percentage in the second half season and the Pythagorean expectation in
the first half of the season. So the first value here is 0.652 and the second value here is 0.691. What that means is there's a closer
correlation between the Pythagorean expectation in the first half of the
season and win percentage in the second half of the season than there is between
win percentage in the first half of the season and win percentage in
the second half of the season. So that in telling us that the Pythagorean
expectation is actually working better than win percentage and this correlation
coefficient is relatively high. So that means that in some sense,
we would do well to use Pythagorean expectation as
our forecasting value for win percentage rather than
win percentage itself. And that Pythagorean expectation is
going to be a fairly good forecaster of win percentage. And in fact, it's worth pointing out. This is precisely why Bill James
originally advanced Pythagorean expectation as a useful measure in
baseball precisely because he thought it would be more reliable than
looking at win percentage. So what we've shown with our
analysis of the data is that Bill James is exactly right,
which is perhaps not a surprise. It is a very nice illustration of
his insight about the value of Pythagorean expectation. And one thing we can see
here is if we just do a sort to see how close the relationship is for
each team. So we've sorted here the values by
win percentage in the second half of the season, and you can see
here what that relationship is. And indeed, as you go down, you can see,
which ones are highly correlated and which ones are less well correlated. And so that's something if you're
interested in looking at individual teams that you might want to study. So to conclude what we've
gone through this week, we've looked at a relationship
between variables in sports. We've looked at the relationship
between win percentage and Pythagorean expectation and explored how
closely these two things go together. What we found is that generally, in most
sports, they do fit very closely together, so they are highly
correlated with each other. Although we found that
cricket was an exception, we've also found that not only can
you use a value like Pythagorean expectation to understand or explain
the relationship of data in the past, but you can actually use it
as a forecasting variable. And that's something that we're going
to be interested in as we progress through these books. So that gives you the idea and
a sense of the power that there is in using a framework like
python to analyze sports data. We're going to obviously go through
these techniques in much more detail and make you much more familiar with
how to use these things yourselves. And hopefully that's going to become
clearer as you progress through these books.